In this video I'll show you how to
save information on your phone during
an execution of your application, and how
to retrieve it during the next execution.
I will be using the Block05
application as an example.
So, upon starting, this application
presents a white background.
And when you click, for instance,
the magenta radio button,
the background turns magenta.
And if you click blue, it turns blue.
If you close the application and
execute it again,
the background is set to the last
color that you've picked.
Start a new Android Studio project.
Call the application Block05.
Click Next.
Pick the API level 16.
Next, choose an empty activity.
Next.
And Finish.
I will start by building
the graphical user interface.
Go to activity_main.xml.
Then get rid of the default
"Hello World" TextView.
And drag a RadioGroup here.
So this RadioGroup will be
named radioGroup_colors.
And next, we will add three
buttons to this radio group.
The first button will read Blue, and
that will be our radioButton_blue.
The second button will let
the user choose the magenta color.
Magenta.
RadioButton.
And the last one is for the yellow.
Yellow.
Let's change its id to radioButton_yellow.
And one more thing we need to do
is to give a name to this layout,
because in this application we want to
change the background color of the layout.
So we need a way to refer to it.
So here,
let's take the relative layout and
scroll down until you
find the property id.
And let's call it layout.
Okay.
Now, I can go to
the MainActivity.java file and
start adding some interactivity
to our user interface.
So first,
let's retrieve a reference to the layout.
RelativeLayout layout.
So that's a relative layout.
And I get a reference by
using findViewById method.
R.id.layout.
Then I need a reference
to my group of buttons.
So I type RadioGroup
radioGroup_colors.
I use a findViewById.
And I call this radioGroups_colors.
Don't forget to cast that.
Okay, and now that this is done,
I can add a listener to this radio group
so that when one item is clicked,
I can react to this event.
So it's
radioGroup_colors.setOnCheckedChangedListener
Listener.
Let's add a new OnCheckedChangeListener.
Okay, so when one of the item
of the radio group is selected,
I'll get the ID of the radio button here.
So now I'll do something different
depending on the value of this
integer here.
So if the checked ID is
equal to my view named
radioButton_blue, then I will change
the background color
of the layout to blue.
So layout.setBackgroundColor.
And let's use a predefined color here,
like blue.
Now, if the checkedId is equal to the ID
of the second button, so, it was magenta,
then I will change the layout to magenta.
What?
I forgot the if, else if
layout.setBackgroundColor to
Color.MAGENTA.
And last case.
Else, if it's equal to the last button,
named radioButton_yellow, then I change
the layout background color to yellow.
Okay, let's try that first.
I'll run the application on the emulator.
When I click blue,
the background turns blue.
If I click magenta, it turns pink.
And if I click yellow,
it's turning yellow.
But now if I exit the application,
and if I come back to it
after, the application does not remember
that the last picked color was yellow.
And the background is back to white.
Now, what we want to do is to remember
from one execution to the next
what was the last color picked.
Before we do that, before we add that
functionality, I want to show you
something that's quite useful when
you are developing with Android.
It's called the ADB,
the Android debug bridge.
So, you move to the directory where
you've installed the Android SDK,
and there you should find a
directory named platform-tools.
So move into that directory.
And there you will find the ADB.
So you can start it using adb,
space, shell.
So depending on your operating system,
the syntax might look slightly different.
But once you start this command,
now, here,
it's like we are on the device,
on the emulated device.
So it's only Linux commands that
you'll be able to enter here.
So for instance, to list the content
of that directory, I type in ls.
And there is one particular directory and
subdirectory that we're interested in.
It's data/data.
So let's move into that one.
Change directory, data/data.
And in here I'll find
information associated with
all the applications which
are installed on my phone.
And you see here, Block05,
the one that we are working on.
Let's move into it,
cd fr, okay.
And there,
if I list the content of the directory,
for now we only have cache and
code_cache elements.
We don't have anything
related to preferences.
You'll see that in a while, after we
have implemented our new functionality,
it will look different.
We'll come back to these window later on.
For now, let's move back to the code.
Android offers different possibilities for
your application to store information.
You can either create a database or
create a regular plain text file.
But here we will use preferences.
So preferences are stored as couples
of key-value in an XML file.
The object to let you manipulate those
preferences is called SharedPreferences.
So, SharedPreference preferences.
I can get one using
the getSharedPreferences method.
I need to provide the name of the file.
So if there are no preferences
file with this name
existing already, Android will
create one when we call the editor.
Otherwise, it will point
to the existing file.
And then I need to provide an access mode.
Since I only want my application to
be able to access this information,
I'll keep the mode to private.
Then I need to retrieve an editor,
let's call it editor, on that file.
I can do that by using the edit method.
Okay.
Now I'll be able to read information
from this preferences file and
store information into it.
Okay.
First let me change something here.
I would like to replace this series
of if-else by a switch statement.
So if you put your cursor here on the if,
and
then the little light bulb,
you can let Android do that for you.
Replace if with switch.
Okay.
And something else I like to do is,
let's add a variable which will
hold the ID of the code for
the color I would like to use for
the background.
So let's create a colorCode.
Let's initialize it to zero.
And in here, instead of setting
the background directly,
I'll just change that so
that colorCode = Color.BLUE.
And same below.
I'll do the same here.
And there.
And I'll set the layout background
color only at the end.
setBackgroundColor to our colorCode.
Okay.
Now, what I want to do, also,
in addition to set the background color,
is also to remember that
color in our preferences file.
So it's time to add something
to our preferences file.
With editor.put,
it's an integer that we want to put.
And we need to provide a key.
Let's call it colorId.
And then the value.
So in our case, that would be colorCode.
Okay.
The information is not stored on the disk
until you call the commit
method on the editor.
So don't forget that.
It's a common mistake to
forget this commit statement.
Okay.
So now if I run the application again,
Now when I click blue,
if I go back to my ADB window and
check the content of that directory again,
there is something new.
Notice that there is a shared
preference which wasn't here before.
So let's explore it.
So in this directory now,
we have a file named COLOR_PREF.xml.
And if I use a cat command,
I'm able to see the content of this file.
And you see that I've got one element,
one element with the key colorId,
and the value, which is this,
it's the code color for blue, okay?
And if I change to magenta and
I repeat the same command here,
you see that the value changed, okay?
But if I exit my application and
if I run it again, the screen is white.
It didn't remember that the last
picked color was magenta.
Well, actually, it did remember it,
but we haven't used that information.
So we need to add
something more to our code.
Here at the beginning,
we need to read the preferences file to set
the initial background color for
our layout.
So, to read the background
color for the layout,
I'll check if the preferences file contains
an element with the key colorId.
colorId.
And if that's the case, then I'll retrieve
this value by using preferences.getInt,
because I remember it's an int I stored,
the int stored with the key colorId.
And then I need to
provide a default value.
Let's put 0.
So that's the color code
which was saved in our file.
Now let's use that to set
the background color of the layout.
layout.setBackgroundColor.
Okay.
So now we are reading this information
from the color preferences file, and
using it to set the background color.
Let's try the application one more time.
Okay, see, when it started,
it read the XML file, found the code for
magenta, and so
it turned the background to magenta.
If you want to make sure that's correct,
let's click yellow.
And then let's close the application and
start it again.
The background is yellow.
In this video,
you've learned how to save information
on your phone using preferences.
So preferences is a set of key value
that you store in an XML file.
To access this file, you need to
create a SharedPreference object
by giving the name of the file and
the access mode.
And then to edit it,
to store information or
to retrieve information from it,
you need an editor.
After that, you can use a putInt,
putDouble, putString, or other methods
to store a new set of
data in the XML file.
You provide a key and the value.
But the set will be saved on the file
only after you've called
the commit method on the editor.
To retrieve an information from the file,
you use getInt, getDouble, getString.
And then you retrieve the value
by providing its key.
You've also learned how
to explore the content of
the file system of your emulator.
For that you can use the ADB shell.
So ADB stands for
Android debugging bridge.
And it's located in the platform-tools
folder from your Android SDK directory.